# HelpME Pace
The first component of the HelpME suite, HelpME Pace is a tool for optimizing how you spend your limited energy each day, while staying within the safe zone of whatever level of conditioning you have, once you have figuring what level of activity you can sustain for different timespans at different intensity levels, and also calibrating your recovery rate during rest periods. As part of setting it up, you tell it some parameters that help to set your pacing profile.

Using that information, we set some guide rails and building blocks to help you plan out your day and execute it in manageable chunks. We don't assume you're a machine that can deliver infallibly on target as long as we learn to segment our work by pomodoros and take our planned microbreraks and longer breaks when they come up; that only works when you're operating nowhere near your performance limit, but as you approach your limit, and want to beat the Peter Principle (that every worker rises to their level of incompetence) you will eventually encounter at least a few cases of "wow, easier said than done" or "oops, that's gonna hurt for awhile" whether it comes with success or failure, and will need to know, have you reached your limit, or is your condition just depleted from the effort?

In most cases it is the latter, and I believe condition-adaptive pacing is the strategy that can not only people with disabilities, even if from invisible illness, accomplish more of what really matters in life than their normativerly able friends, and likewise can help an ironman competing, high performing executive or influencer achieve their next-level goal.

# What's This All About?

Here we are optimizing for both minimal negative impact and maximal positive results, recognizing that effort can bring about either or both, and this must be balanced across many different areas. There's no way we can track all that cognitively. So what we do is gear ourselves to track it intuitively. Like in nature; but we're not in nature so this kind of cybernetic support helps...

In the model I have for it now, energy usage is separated into three areas of function - autonomic, kinesthetic, and cognitive - with some overlap as well as differences between them in terms of the areas where they call on the strongest energetic needs for the body, how a localized drain appears symtomically in the body, but the simple truth is a localized low-battey signal during a cognitive exertion is a strong predictor that you may also be clumsier and more injury prone that day at the gym; and the energy that would go into that workout might be better poured into recovery on a day like today. And if you keep pushing, you may find that you're more prone to athete's foot, or headcolds. And if you still keep pushing, that's when the body has to push back, and go contracting your energy envelope until you do stop - th

That is energy envelope theory in a nutshell, at least in the highly opinionated, deeply introspective, this epigenetically neurodivergent creator. can explanain it., I hope it illustrates why pacing is such a critical game changing skill in the management of complex chronic disease, and also useful to anyone else who feels like they're burning the candle at both ends.

# Healthy and Young; Why Use a Tool For Sick People?

So you're not ill, eh? You work a full time job, even have energy left over for a side hustle or passion project. You have a headache every evening; it must be from coffee wearing off, but you behave yourself and don't have any, as your circadian rhythm is all messed up (q.v. HelpME Sleep). The next morning, the headache is not gone, but you have your coffee and press on. Now for those who work from home, the shift of gears for the commute is cancelled and you're straight into work as soon as the kids are off to school. So much time is saved... so why is it that the only thing you have energy to do with that extra time is binge the next series on Netflix? Maybe the well proven principles of pacing can help you, too.

# Tried But It's No Use?

Have you tried a paper-based approach to pacing and symptom tracking as recommended by an OT, but found it too onerous to collect and you never looked back at it; or tried using an app like Visibly with its PacePoints system and was frustrated by its cognitively demanding interface? (Digression - that was my issue with Visibly and why I hardly ever use it, and only heard of Visibly PacePoints more recently but still have no idea what they are - for HelpME Pace, perhaps they are an optional input parameter or later automated integration, but for now just something you can take into account intuitively when self-assessing your condition each morning, in the lightweight, wide open focus, low-cog way we like to do things around here.) Maybe you're a hard driving type A or hyperfocused indivdual, for whom even microbreaks seem to cost just as much or ore energy to tear yourself away from what you were immersed in, as it would have to just continue; and a 10 minute beak at the wrong moment can easily cost an hour to get yourself back in the groove; so you have an aversion to the whole idea of stopping except at points you choose.

# Pacing is Natural

Early in our evolution, pacing was almost automatic due to limited resources and plentiful danger, and optimal return on deployment of energy was essential. Ample time was probably spent hunkered down in safety, or playing and relaxing in sheltered territory. Even without yet having the extra demand on brain energetic needs that social comunication and civilization would impose, especially in present day, energy availability was low, and those who spent it unwisely paid a Darwinian price.

# Collapse of the Energy Envelope is Inevitable

People with good health never think about their energy envelope or even are aware of its existence, unless they are pushing themselves to the brink of human performance. Modern society just doesn't challenge us in that way (until it challenges our health, which it does). It's like a fish doesn't realize it is in water, unless the water gets so shallow that it finds itself flopping on the shoal, struggling in an environment it could not have foreseen. And also, old age sooner for many, later for others, sharply for some and more gradually for others but still inexorably for all, there is a reduction in what we can do, how hard we can drive, and how long we can go before we feel an impact; there may be dementia, loss of mobility, or disease, all of which relate to the three broad functional areas for energy deployment as noted before, and therefore to the energy envelope.

We also could not have anticipated the impacts of our toxin laden society, pandemics, vaccines, environmental contominants, and foods packed with poison, that future biological health crises might not only kill some percentage of the population, but might also take some percentage of the capacity of those that remain, such that our guage of what we can do is no longer correctly tuned, or maybe it's just that old age is bringing about faster declines at this particular point for some reason, where if it was slower I might not notice it happening, and others might not either. We have mechanisms built into our makeup, a kindness, that we don't notice those natural declines except by looking at differences in outcomes; and then only if we're aware enough to see it.

Mostly we just feel like we're working harder to get the same result, until we've done enough and are ready to enjoy retirement. This is not different from the progression of complex chronic disease toward disability, except that the outcome is happy, and the demands of retirement are once again well within their energy envelope, and whatever declines in cognitive or kinesthetic function are fine, and hopefully their autonomic functions will keep on holding them together until a ripe old age, to enjoy that well-earned retirement.

